---
title: 'BRIGHTNESS, CONTRAST, SATURATION AND SHARPNESS'
date: 2020-06-28
permalink: /posts/2020/06/brightness-contrast-saturation-sharpness/
tags:
  - Digital Image
---

comparision for [BRIGHTNESS, CONTRAST, SATURATION, AND SHARPNESS](http://www.steves-digicams.com/knowledge-center/brightness-contrast-saturation-and-sharpness.html#b)

### Background
At first glance, it might seem that doing an article on the four most common image controls would be a waste of time. After all, brightness, contrast, saturation, and sharpness are often thought to be the simplest controls as they've been around as long as the color TV. People often overlook the fact that all four are related, however, and changing any one of them can change the other three. Do you know how they are related and how you are changing the balance of brightness, contrast, saturation, and sharpness by only changing one of the three parameters? Let's take a look.

### Brightness
Brightness is generally thought to be the simplest in concept. Just make the image brighter or darker by a specified amount, right? First we must distinguish between true brightness and something else called "gamma". Increasing gamma by moving a mid-tone slider on a histogram is not the same as increasing brightness. Increasing Gamma/mid-tones can make an image look brighter, but it is non-linear in that it only increases brightness of the shadows and mid-tones in an image without affecting the highlights. Traditional brightness on the other hand, simply brightens the entire image from the shadows to the highlights equally. Let's see what happens when we add some brightness to an image. The following test image is designed to bring out some of the effects we will refer to in this article.
### Contrast
Contrast is defined as the separation between the darkest and brightest areas of the image. Increase contrast and you increase the separation between dark and bright, making shadows darker and highlights brighter. Decrease contrast and you bring the shadows up and the highlights down to make them closer to one another. Adding contrast usually adds "pop" and makes an image look more vibrant while decreasing contrast can make an image look duller. Here is an example where we add some contrast.
### Saturation
Saturation is similar to contrast, however instead of increasing the separation between shadows and highlights, we increase the separation between colors. An example showing increased saturation would show the same effect as figure 3 above for the red image but the B/W image would not change at all because B/W or gray detail has no saturation. As a result, an increase in saturation results in an increase in contrast, brightness, and sharpness on the red image as in figure 3 and no change to the B/W image. Again, a change in saturation normally has a more noticeable effect on vibrant colors and less on dull colors or colors that are almost neutral. This is because to change saturation, there must be some color saturation to work with in the first place.
### Sharpness
Sharpness can be defined as edge contrast, that is, the contrast along edges in a photo. When we increase sharpness, we increase the contrast only along/near edges in the photo while leaving smooth areas of the image alone. Let's take a look at an example with increased sharpness.
### Different effects for different parts of an image
The overall effect of brightness, contrast, saturation, and sharpness will vary depending on the content in each photo. Consider increasing contrast as an example. Increasing contrast makes shadows darker and highlights brighter. If we increase contrast on an image where most of the detail in the photo is very bright, say an overexposed sunset, we may actually end up with less contrast! Why? Because there are no (or minimal) shadows in the photo so separating the shadows and highlights in an image that only contains highlights will just compress the highlights, making them less contrasty. Similarly, taking a soft focus shot and increasing saturation may cause bright/vivid colors to appear sharper than gray or near gray detail and that may cause an unwanted change in overall balance of the photo. As an example, increasing saturation on a shot of a cricket sitting on a red rose petal may increase the sharpness of the red rose petal, taking focus off the less colorful subject (the cricket) because it will be less affected by the change in saturation. The end result may be that the rose petal now looks sharper than the cricket, making the cricket appear to be out of focus, all because you increased saturation. Being able to control these linked effects when using simple controls like brightness, contrast, saturation, and sharpness is a bit of an art, but understanding why we sometimes get unexpected results is half the battle!

### Summary
While brightness, contrast, saturation, and sharpness may appear to be the simplest of image controls on the surface and may appear to be mutually exclusive controls, they are related and intertwined in such a way that changing any one of them can create quite complex effects in your photos. Understanding how they are related can be a big step in understanding how to use them and more importantly when to use them. Before adding or reducing brightness, contrast, saturation, or sharpness, think about this article and ask yourself what you are really trying to accomplish. Hopefully this article will help you pick the right control or the right situation.
